the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu so let's start right away
with stuff that we will need to see
before we can go on more advanced things
so hopefully yesterday in recitation you
heard a bit about vectors how many of
you actually knew about vectors before
that okay that's the V majority if
you're not one of those people well
hopefully you
will learn about vectors right now I'm
sorry that the learning curve will be a
bit steeper for the first week but
hopefully um you will adjust fine if you
have you know trouble with vectors do go
to your instructors recitation
instructors officers for you know extra
practice if you feel the need to uh
you'll see it's pretty
easy
so just to remind
you a vector is a quantity that has both
a direction and a magnitude or length so
so concretely the way you draw a vector
is by some arow like that okay and so it
has a length and it's pointing in some
direction
and so now the way that we compute
things with vectors typically is we
introduce a coordinate system so if
we're in the plane X Y axis if we're in
space XYZ axis so usually I will try to
draw my XYZ axis consistently to look
like this and then I can represent my
Vector in terms of its components along
the coordinate axis so that means when I
have this Arrow I can ask how much does
it go in the X Direction how much does
it go in the y direction how much does
it go in the Z
Direction and so for example let's call
this Vector a so a small convention uh
when we have a vector quantity we put an
arrow on top to remind us that it's a
vector if it's in a textbook then
sometimes it's in bold because it's
easier to type Set uh if you've tried
you know in your favorite word processor
because bold is easy and vectors are not
easy
um so the vector you can try to
decompose in terms
of unit vectors directed along the
coordinate axis so the convention is
there's a vector that we call I
hat that points along the x-axis and has
length one there's a vector called J hat
that does the same along the y- axis and
a k hat that does the same along the
z-axis and
so we can express any Vector in terms of
its components so the other notation
is A1 A2 A3 between these square
brackets
well maybe I should say angular
pcket so the
length of a
vector we denote by if you want it's the
same notation as the absolute value so
that's going to be a
number or as we say now a scalar
quantity okay so a scalar quantity is a
usual numerical quantity as opposed to a
vector
quantity and its direction
is sometimes
called D of a and that can be obtained
just
by scaling the vector down to unit
length for example by dividing it by its
length
Okay
so well there's a lot of notation to be
learned so for example if I have two
points p and Q then I can draw a vector
from P to q and that Vector is called
Vector PQ
okay so maybe I we call it a but a
vector doesn't really have necessarily A
starting point and an ending point okay
so if I decide to start here and I go by
the same distance in the same direction
this is also the vector a it's the same
vector
so a lot of vectors will draw starting
at the origin but we don't have
to
okay so let's just check and
see how things went in
recitation
um I
it so let's say that I give you the
vector 3 2
1 and so what do you think about the L
for this
Vector okay I see an answer
forming so a lot of you are answering
the same thing maybe I shouldn't spoil
it for those who
haven't it yet okay I think the
overwhelming vote is in favor of answer
number two
um I see some sixes I don't know that's
a perfectly good answer too but
hopefully in a few minutes it won't be I
don't know
anymore so let's see how do we
find the length of a vector 3 2
well so this Vector
a it comes towards along the xaxis by
three units it goes to the right along
the y axis by two units and then it goes
up by one unit along the
z-axis okay so it's pointing towards
here that's pretty hard to
draw so how do we get its length well
maybe we can start with something easier
the length of a vector in the
plane so observe
that you know a is obtained from a
vector B in the plane let's say b equals
3 I hat plus 2 J hat and then we just
have to still go up by one unit okay so
let me try to draw a picture in this
vertical plane that contains a and b if
I draw it in the vertical plane so
that's the Z AIS that's not any
particular
axis then my Vector B
will go
here and my Vector a will go above
it and here that's one
unit and here I have a right angle so I
can use the Pythagorean theorem to find
that length a s equals length b^ 2 +
1 now we are reduced to finding the
length of B but the length of B we can
again find using the Pythagorean theorem
in the XY plane because here we have the
right angle here we have three units and
here we have two
units okay so if you do the calculations
you will see that well length of B is
square root of 3 square + 2 square
that's 13 so sare root of 13
and length of a is square root of length
b^ 2 + 1 squar if you want
which is going to be square < T of 13 +
1 is square < TK of
14 hence answer number two which almost
all of you
gave okay so the general formula you
know if you follow what we did in
general
if we have a vector with components A1
A2
A3 then the length of a is the square
root of A1 s + A2 s+ A3
s okay any questions about
that uh yes does this pattern continue
for vales above
A3 yes so in general we indeed can
consider vectors in abstract spaces that
have any number of coordinates and then
you have more components uh in this
class we'll mostly see vectors with two
or three components only because they're
easier to draw and because a lot of the
MTH that will see works exactly the same
way whether you have three variables or
a million variables if we had a vector
with more components then we would have
a lot of trouble drawing it but we could
still Define its length in the same way
by summing the squares of a component
so um I'm sorry to say that here you
know multivariable multi will mean
mostly two or three
but be assured that it works just the
same way if you have 10,000
variables just calculations are
longer okay um more
questions
okay so what else can we do with vectors
well another thing that I'm sure you
know how to do with vectors is to add
them or to scale them
so vector
addition so if you have two vectors A
and B then you can form them Su their
sum a plus b how do we do that well
first I should tell you vectors you know
they have this double life they at the
same time geometric objects that we can
draw like this on pictures and there are
also computational objects that we can
represent by numbers so every question
about vectors will have two answers one
geometric and one numerical okay so
let's start with a
geometry so let's say that I have two
vectors A and B given to
me and let's say that I thought of
drawing them at the same place to start
with well to take the sum what I should
do is actually move B so that it's
starts at the end of a at the head of
a okay so this is again Vector
B so observe this actually forms now a
parallelogram right so this side is
again Vector
a and now if we take the diagonal of
that
parallelogram this is what we call a
plus
b okay so the idea being that to move
move along a plus b it's the same as to
move first along a and then along b or
along B then along a A plus Bal B+
a okay now if we do it
numerically
then all you do is you just add the
first component of a with the first
component of b the second with the
second and the third with the
third okay say that a was a A1 A2 A3 B
was B1 B2 B3 then you just add this way
okay so it's pretty
straightforward so for example you know
I said that my Vector over there its
components are 3 2 1 but I also wrote it
as 3 * I + 2 * J plus K what does that
mean oh so I need to tell you first
about multiplying by a scalar so
so maybe I should say this is about
addition so multiplication by a scalar
it's very easy if you have a vector
a then you can form a vector 2 a just by
making it go twice as far in the same
direction okay or we can make half a
more
modestly or we can even
make minus a and so on
okay so now you see if I do the
calculation 3 * I + 2 * J + K well what
does it mean 3 * I is just going to go
along the x axis but by distance of
three instead of one and then 2 * J goes
two units along the y axis and K goes up
by one unit well if you add these
together you will go from the origin
then along the x-axis then parallel to
the y axis and then up and you will end
up indeed at the end point of the vector
a okay any questions at this point yes
so for the the geom
vector exactly to add vectors
geometrically you just put the head of
the first vector and the tail of the
second Vector in the same place and then
it's head to tail addition
any other
questions
yes that's correct if you subtract two
vectors that just means you add the
opposite of a vector so for example if I
wanted to do a minus B I would first go
along a and then along minus B which
would take me somewhere over
there okay so a minus B if you want
would go from here to here
okay
so well hopefully you've kind of seen
that stuff either you know before in
your lives or at least
yesterday so I'm going to use that as an
excuse to move quickly forward but
um
so now we're going to learn a few more
operations about vectors
and these operations will be useful to
us when we start trying to do a bit of
geometry so of course you've all done
some geometry but we're going to see
that geometry can be done using vectors
and actually in many ways it's the right
language for that and in particular when
we learn about functions we really will
want to use vectors more than maybe you
know the other kind of geometry that
you've seen
before I mean of course it's just a
language in a way I mean we're just
reformulating things that you have seen
you already know since childhood but
you'll see that notation somehow helps
to make it maybe more
straightforward so what is dot product
well dot product is a way of multiplying
two vectors to get a number a
scalar
and well let me start by giving you a
definition in terms of
components so what we do let's say that
we have a vector a with component A1 A2
A3 a vector B with components B1 B2 B3
well we multiply the first component by
the first component for second by the
second for third by the
third if you have n components you keep
going and you sum all of these
together okay and important this is a
scalar okay you do not get a vector you
get a number I know it's sounds
completely obvious from the definition
here but you
know um in the middle of action you know
when you're going to do complicated
problems it's sometimes easy to
forget so that's a
definition what is it good for why would
we ever want to do that you know that's
kind of a strange
operation so probably to see what is
good for I should first tell you what it
does
geometrically okay so what does it do
geometric
well what you do when you multiply two
vectors in this way I claim the answer
is equal to the length of a Time the
length of
btimes the cosine of the angle between
them so if I have my Vector a
and if I have my Vector
B and I have some angle between them I
multiply the length of a Time the length
of B times the cosine of that
angle so that looks like a very
artificial operation I mean why would we
want to do that complicated
multiplication well the basic answer is
it tells us at the same time about
lengths and about
angles and the extra bonus thing is that
it's very easy to compute if you have a
component see that formula is actually
pretty
easy
so okay maybe I should first tell you
how do we get this from that because you
know in math one tries to justify
everything to prove theorems so if you
want that's a theorem that's the first
theorem in 1802 so how do we prove that
theorem how do we check that this is
indeed correct using this
definition
so or in more common language
what does this geometric definition
mean well the first thing it means you
know before we multiply two vectors
let's start multiplying a vector with
itself that's probably
easier so if we multiply a vector a with
itself using this dot product so by the
way should point out we put this dot
here that's why it's called dot
product um so so what this tells us is
we should get the same thing as
multiplying the length of
a with itself so squared times the
cosine of the angle but now the cosine
of an
angle of Z cosine of 0 you all know is
one okay so that's going to be length a
squ well does that CH stand a chance of
being true well let's see if we do a. A
Using this formula we will get A1 2+ A2
2 + A3 squ that is indeed the square of
the
length so check that works okay now what
about two different
vectors can we understand what this says
and how it relates to
that so let's say that I have two
different vectors
A and
B and I want to try to understand what's
going
on
so my claim is that we are going to be
able to understand the relation between
this and v in terms of the low of cosin
so the low of cosines is something that
tells you about the length of the third
side in a triangle like this in terms of
these two sides and the angle
here okay
so the low of cosin which hopefully you
have seen before says that so let me
give a name to this side let's call this
side C and as a vector c c is a minus B
it's minus B plus a
so it's getting a bit cuted
here so the law of
cosin says that the length of the third
side in this triangle is equal
to length A S Plus length b well if I
stopped here that would be pagus but I
don't have a right angle so I have a
term which is twice length a length B
cosine
thet okay has everyone seen this formula
sometime yeah no I hear some yes I hear
some NOS well it's a fact about I mean
you probably haven't seen it with
vectors but it's a fact about the side
lengths in a
triangle and well um I'm not sure that
I well let's say if you haven't seen it
before then this is going to be a proof
of the law of cosines if you believe
this otherwise it's the other way
around so let's try to see how this
relates to what I'm saying about the dot
product
so I've been saying that length C squ
that's the same thing as C do
c okay that we have checked
now C do c well C is a minus B so it's a
minus B product a minus
B what do we want to do in a situation
like that well we want to expand this
into a sum of four terms are we allowed
to do that well you know we have this
dot product it's a mysterious new
operation we don't really know well the
answer is yes we can do it you can check
from this definition that it behaves in
the usual way in terms of expanding
factoring and so
on so I can write that as a do
a minus a
B minus b.
a plus
B.B so a. a is length a
squ let me jump ahead to the last term B
dob is length b
s and then these two terms well they're
the same you can check from the
definition that a b or b. a are the same
thing so there's no hidden trick here
this is really minus twice a do
B okay so now let's compare these two
formulas well you see that this
term is I mean this is the only
difference between these two formulas
for the length of C
so if you believe in the law of cosin
then it tells you that yes this is a
proof that a b equals length a length B
cosine
Theta or vice versa if you've never seen
the law of cosin but you're willing to
you're willing to believe this
then this is the proof of the law of
cosiness okay so the law of coins of
this interpretation are equivalent to
each other
okay any
questions
yes so in the second one there isn't a
cosine Theta because I'm just expanding
a DOT product okay so I'm just you know
writing Cals a minus B and then I'm
expanding this algebraically and then I
get to an answer that has an a do B so
then if I wanted to express that without
a product then I would have to introduce
a cosine and I would get the same there
okay so yeah if you want the next step
to recover the low of cosin would be to
plug in this formula for a b and then
you would have a
coine okay
let's keep
going okay so
what is this good for now that we have a
definition we should figure out what we
can do with
it
so what are the applications of dot
product well we'll discover new
applications of dot product throughout
the entire semester but let me tell you
at least about those that are readily
visible so one is to
compute
lengths and angles
especially
angles so let's do an
example let's say that for example I
have in
space I have a point
P which is at 1 0
0 I have a point Q which is at 0 1 0 so
it's at distance one here one here and I
have a third Point r at 0 02 so it's at
height
two and let's say that I'm curious and
I'm wondering what is the angle so here
I have a triangle in
space connecting p q and R and I'm
wondering what is this angle
here okay so of course one solution is
to build a model and then you know go
and measure the angle but we can do
better than that we can just find the
angle using product so how would we do
that
well
so if we look at this formula we see so
let's say that we want to find the angle
here well let's look at the formula for
PQ do
p well we said it should be length PQ *
length p r time the cosine of the angle
okay now what do we know and what do we
not know well certainly at this point we
don't know the cosine of the angle
that's what we would like to
find but the lengths certainly we can
compute we know how to find these
lengths and this dot product we know how
to compute because we have an easy
formula
here okay so we can compute everything
else and then find Theta so actually
what we will do is we will find
Theta in this way
we'll take the dot product of PQ with p
and then we'll divide by the lengths
[Applause]
okay
so let's
see so we say cosine Theta is
PQ p
over length
PQ length p
r so let's try to figure out what is
Vector PQ well to go from P to Q I
should go minus one unit along the X
Direction plus one unit along the y
direction and I'm not moving in the Z
Direction so to go from P to Q I have to
move by minus one 1
Z to go from P to R I go minus one along
the x-axis and plus two along the z-axis
so p r i claim is this
okay then the lengths of these vectors
well we take - 1 s + 1 s + 0 squar
square root and then same thing with the
other
one
okay so if a denominator will become
well there's a square root of two and
there's a square root of five
what about the
numerator well so remember to do the dot
product we multiply this by this and
that by that that by that and we add -1
* -1 makes 1 plus 1 * 0 that's 0 0 * 2
is 0 again so we will get 1 / < TK of
10 okay that's the cosine of the angle
and of course if we want the actual
angle well we have to take a calculator
find the inverse cosine and you'll find
that it's about 71.5
de actually we'll be using mostly
radians but for today uh I mean that's
certainly a more speaking answer
then okay any questions about
that
no okay so in particular I should point
out one thing that's really neat about
the answer see I mean we got this number
we don't really know what it means
exactly because it mixes together the
length and the angle but one thing's
interesting here it's the sign of the
answer the fact that we got a positive
number so if you think about it the
lengths are always positive so the sign
of the dot product is the same as the S
of cosine
Theta so in
[Music]
fact the sign of a
b is going to be
positive if the angle is less than 90
so that means geometrically my two
vectors are going more or less in the
same direction they make an acute
angle it's going to be zero
if the angle is exactly
90 okay because that's when the coine
will be
zero and it will be
negative if the angle is more than 90
so that means they go however in
opposite
directions okay so that's basically one
way to think about what dot product
measures it measures how much the two
vectors are going along each
other okay and that actually leads us to
the next
application so let's see did I have a
number one
there yes so if I had a number one I
must have a number two the second
application is to
detect orthogonality it's to figure
out when two things are
perpendicular okay so orthogonality is
just a complicated World from Greek to
say things are
perpendicular so
let's just take an example let's say I
give you the equation x + 2 y + 3 z =
z okay so that defines a certain number
a certain set of points in
space and what do you think the set of
solutions looks like if I give you this
equation so far I see one two three
answers okay
so I see various competing answers
but yeah I see a lot of people voting
for answer number
four uh I see also some I don't knows
and some other things but um the
majority vote seems to be a plane and
indeed that's the correct
answer so how do we see what it's
happening I should say this is the
equation of a
plane so there's many ways to see that
and I'm not going to give you all of
them but here's one way to think about
it
so let's think geometrically about how
to express this condition in terms of
vectors so let's say let's take the
origin you know o by convention is the
point 00
0 and let's take a point P that will
satisfy this equation or not so at
coordinates
XYZ so what does this condition here
mean well it means the following think
so let's take the vector
op okay so Vector op of course has
components
XYZ now we can think of this as actually
a DOT product between op and a
mysterious Vector that won remain
mysterious for very long namely the
vector 1 2
3 okay so this condition is the same
as
op. a
equals 0 right if I take the dot product
op. a I get x * 1 + y * 2 plus Z *
3 but now what does it mean that the dot
product between op and a is zero well it
means that op and a are
perpendicular
okay so I have this Vector a I'm not
going to bother to draw it realistic
let's say it goes for example this
way then a point P solves this equation
exactly when the vector from o to P is
perpendicular to a and I claim that
defines a plane for example you know if
it helps you to see it take a vertical
Vector what does it mean to be
perpendicular to the vertical Vector it
means you're horizontal it's the
horizontal plane here it's a plane that
passes through the origin and is
perpendicular to this Vector a
okay
so what we get is plane for the
origin
perpendicular to this guy
a and in general what you should
remember
is
that two
vectors have a DOT product equal to zero
if and only if that's equivalent to
cosine of the angle between them is zero
that means the angle is
90 that means A and B are
perpendicular so we have a very fast way
of checking whether two vectors are
perpendicular okay
so
one additional application I think we'll
see that actually tomorrow is to find
the components of a vector along a
certain direction so I claim we can use
this intuition I gave about dot product
telling us how much two vectors go in
the same direction to actually give a
precise meaning to the notion of
component of a vector not just along the
X Y or Z axis but along any direction in
space
so I think I should probably stop here
um but I will see you tomorrow at 2 here
and we'll learn more about that and
about cross product